Dear young people, it is a real pleasure
and a blessing to see you here in such
large numbers; it reminds me a little
of this Gospel, this crowd gathered
around Jesus, for they pressed on
Him so that they might touch Him.
We are still in this ongoing cycle of
talks about love, this theme we keep
returning to again with hopeful hearts.
Many times I hear from you,
dear young people, that when
the topic is love you ask a wide
variety of thoughtful questions.
One of the deepest questions that today’s
young people carry is not what you
think; which particular question is that?
It's not about whom I will love,
in any possible future, not about
any particular person at all.
Unfortunately, that's not it at all,
and the matter goes deeper than that.
But the question is whether I am
even worthy of someone loving me,
a question that haunts many people.
It would seem only natural for us
to ask ourselves the question of
whom I will love, and for you to ask
yourselves that same question too.
However, in talking with you, I can
plainly see that for some people the very
foundations of their sense of self, of
their identity, have become unsettled.
So, instead of asking yourself who
I will love, a great many young
people have reached a point where
they say to themselves, "am I even
worthy that someone loves me?"
What has happened to you that you
have lost that deep, core sense of
your own identity and the genuine,
lasting value of the person you
are, in the life you lead today?
If we pose such a question and live in
a time when your worth is constantly
defined by a dizzying variety of likes,
comments, successes, and competitions,
and that is precisely what social
media keeps feeding you, day after day.
And because of that, many young people
lose their identity and consequently
self-worth, and they ask themselves these
kinds of questions: Am I really worth
anything at all, or do I count for nothing
in this world, in this life we share.
That is why many young people
struggle to see their worth clearly
and to know where they belong.
Will anyone actually love me anymore?
And why is that so?
Because in this world you follow,
in which you live, especially this
online world of social media, it
teaches entirely different values.
How?
For example, if you are
seen, it means you exist.
If someone chooses you, it
means you are worth something.
If you are alone, the question
arises: what's wrong with you?
That is why people wonder whether anyone
will love them when they feel unseen.
We live inside this online
world where value seems tied to
visibility and prompt responses.
And yet the question remains:
what is wrong with you if you
are not noticed by others?
I believe the hardest question
for you all is how to get
married, how to become a wife.
Or why you are alone, why you are single.
Because the foundations of
our values have been shaken.
That means I only truly exist
if I am seen and noticed.
Only when someone chooses me, or sends for
me, or invites me in some way, do I become
worth anything, at least in quotation
marks, but that is not the point.
That is not Christianity.
Because, at the end of the day, if we
examine things from that perspective, in
the final analysis, you are worth exactly
as much as you are desired by others.
Are you all equally desirable, and are you
not all at the same ages, nor desirable
in the same way, really and truly?
Does all this, in fact, mean that
you are, at this point, truly
no longer worth anything at all?
Well, you're not, but alas,
the expiry date does not apply
to you as a person, indeed.
So why, then, have some people, who
once valued them, accepted that for
them a love story has reached its
end, and that their value is no longer
held in esteem by anyone at all?
Where, in all honesty, have we gone wrong?
That statement says that if you are
not in a relationship, if no one truly
wants you, if no one ever chooses you,
if no one ever selects you, then surely
you are not worth anything at all.
That, however, is not true.
Why is that?
Because we need to view this,
in a biblically informed way.
We must not, in any way, measure our
lives and our worth, our very identity,
by the changes and fashions of social
media that now seem to govern our
modern society, but rather by the
timeless truth of what God says to us.
Do you remember that not so
long ago we publicly celebrated
Jesus’ baptism together?
When Jesus was baptised, a voice was
heard saying, “This is my beloved Son,”
and those present were filled with
awe. God did not wait for Jesus to do
anything at all in order to declare
him as His beloved Son. Nor did God
put to him the question, “Will you
be my beloved Son if you should ever
succeed?” You will indeed be my beloved
Son provided that people accept you.
You will be my beloved
Son if you should succeed.
See, God does not work that way.
God tells him who He is
before he has done anything.
For we know that this marks the beginning
of his public ministry, the work of
God beginning to be made clear in him.
And God loves him
sincerely, without pretense.
Nor because of success, nor because
others notice him, nor because
others accept him—these are not the
foundations of how He regards him.
Therefore, dear young people, you are
not valued only if someone notices
you, if someone seeks you, if someone
praises you, if you are successful; your
worth does not depend on applause or
recognition, but on being known by God.
You're not, because, in that
case, it would not possess a
genuinely authentic identity today.
Your identity and ours do not come from
success; value comes first and foremost,
precisely because of merit, in life today.
The problem I carry inside me
is that, sadly, most people
today live by backward values.
If someone loves me, it means
I am truly valuable, and it
gives my life significance.
If I am in a relationship, then I matter
quite a lot to others as well in life.
If someone chooses me, then
I have some intrinsic value
that guides my decisions now.
Believe me, a great many young
people think about their own worth
in this exact way, in life today.
And what will we do if we hold this
inverted view of values, this odd way of
thinking about what truly matters in life?
What will we do when a
relationship breaks up in life?
marriage falls apart in life?
I meet daily those who were, who
had, such sturdy foundations in life.
And when a relationship or a marriage
breaks, it is not the relationship
that shatters, but the identity itself
that cracks and crumbles within life.
A person's value shatters within
them, leaving a hollow place inside,
a gap that changes how they live.
And a person does not merely stay
because of the beloved, but carries
on even without a fragment of who
they are, losing sight of themselves.
Because their own sense of self, their
own value, was steered by another person.
Or by the fact that they were loved, or
longed for, or simply noticed by others.
And I see today now that many
people experience it in this way.
But why am I saying this, you
might ask, in first place?
God operates by a logic that is
fundamentally different from human logic.
God simply and unconditionally
loves us, all of us.
He loves us exactly as we are,
without any conditions at all.
Believe me, many young people seek
happiness; of course it is nice to be
in love and to discover and realise
who you are through that experience.
But another person can never replace
God, nor can they replace your deep
dignity that you are a child of God.
There is no sunshine in
love, nor any compensation.
Many people do that, and that is why
I said it, because they do not truly
know themselves, their identity,
or their weaknesses, and then when
something like that happens not only
does love or a relationship fail,
but the entire system collapses.
Therefore Jesus listens to the words
spoken by God, and you are my beloved Son.
This is what I want to tell you above
all, so that you, young people, may
be able to love well, may be able
to marry, and may be able to build
one good, lasting relationship.
First you must become aware of your
identity, and you must be emotionally and
spiritually healed and restored, sound
and upright, so that you will not become
emotionally vampiric to the other person.
And this is added too often.
Many people, when they lose someone or
a relationship, you know how many people
reach out to me every day: yesterday
my relationship ended or I’m breaking
up or something—what should I do?
If your relationship hadn't
broken yesterday, you wouldn't
even think of God today.
Come on, have a go: those in
relationships, those in marriages.
Try it: would your life function
if there were no people around?
How would you actually
feel, I wonder, honestly?
Would you perhaps, even,
be able to survive?
Or is that really the end
of your world right now?
It’s over; we have nothing left, and
everything has fallen completely apart.
And that, then, makes it very
clear to us what we have actually
put first in our lives, really.
And when we enter relationships as
immature, truly unaware of our own
identity, what happens to many people?
A relationship becomes,
unfortunately, an addiction.
Every relationship, if it has ever been
healthy, should allow absolute freedom
and trust between the people involved.
If you are so utterly dependent
on that person that you no longer
recognise your own identity, or even
know where you would be without that
person, Burac, set aside the question
of what exactly is wrong with you.
What is your identity then?
If you are in a relationship that makes
you dependent upon that one person,
have you perhaps turned your partner
into an idol, or into a golden calf,
or into some other god, so that you
cannot function unless that person is
present and actively part of your life?
You know, there are people who cannot
bear to be apart for two days, whether
on holiday or for work, because there
is immediately some fear that arises.
Thus there can be no real,
genuine love between us if we find
ourselves trapped in a state of
mutual dependence on one another.
That, quite plainly, is not freedom.
Secondly, what kind of love is
it when fear exists, fear of
losing that person, fear that
you cannot function without them?
And that is exactly what I
meant; everything about it
seems inverted or reversed.
And what's more, when you are emotionally
immature, when you are not aware of
your own identity, the other partner
becomes the judge of your worth.
In other words, love should be a
choice made freely, a conscious
agreement entered into by people,
not a prison built from fear itself.
That isn’t good.
It’s very important you understand you’re
valuable, even without any relationship.
It’s not only if you’re sought
after; it’s not only if you’re
noticed; it’s not only if you’re in
a relationship that you’re worth.
Many people need to hear this, and I’ll
explain why some feel, at thirty or
twenty-five years old, that they are
not worth much anymore, in a world that
constantly pressures people to prove
their worth and chase superficial success.
I get goosebumps when I hear from young
people saying that their time has passed,
and I want to help them recognise their
worth now, to find and hold onto purpose,
to build self-respect, and to believe
that their value comes from who they
are, not from what they own or achieve.
Well, what's past is past; mine
has only just begun to live.
But it's meant to be said in the context
of love, relationships and romance.
She says mine's already past.
And then, on the other hand, let
a grandmother come to confession
and say, I have a friend.
You see that not all have passed.
It is very important that you know you
are worthy, because it is extremely
important that within a relationship you
are completely free to love, so you won't
have to sell yourself, nor fear anything,
and you won't wake up with a clenched jaw.
Do I truly believe that I am already
loved by God, just as I am, here and now?
That, indeed, is the question
you need to ask yourself.
Not whether anyone else will love me,
not whether anyone else will notice
me, but whether you feel deep inside
that you are truly worthy, and that
God loves you exactly as you are,
regardless of whether you have someone
in your life, or whether you are alone.
That is the essential question: when you
are truly happy and loved, and you feel
that very love coming from God, you become
ready, in that moment, to enter into
a meaningful and lasting relationship.
Behold this scene, which you have
heard today in the Gospel before you.
You have heard today in the
Gospel that they pressed Jesus.
That Jesus was making ready to slip away
from the crowd because they had heard
that Jesus was performing miracles.
And this crowd saw in him
nothing but a miracle worker.
And then they, it is said,
began to rush at him.
Literally they were already
on the verge of stoning him.
And for his own safety he had to
resort to lying in order to slip away
from that very crowd assembled there.
How much we fling ourselves down to
the floor, again and again, please nine
novenas, give the husband, give the wife,
turn this novena, turn that one, give
me it like this, give me it like that.
We literally bore Jesus, we crush Him.
Behold, you see this crowd.
Half of you came only
because the topic is love.
You will not be in Lent because
the cross does not interest you.
It is your hearts that interest you.
And in the same way this vast
crowd pressed around Jesus.
They threw themselves forward,
desperately crying out, 'give me this,
give me that.' But what is the problem?
What were they looking at in
Jesus, the great miracle-worker,
the healer of the sick?
Put differently, their own urgent,
pressing needs blinded them too, so they
did not recognise Jesus as the Messiah.
Look, you are here today
in this crowd as well.
Have your own pressing needs
likewise blinded you from forcefully
pressing your way into the church
solely because the topic is love?
Are your prayers directed toward
Jesus solely and completely
because of your own personal needs?
Perhaps even your own needs have blinded
you before God, for you treat Him as
if He were a jukebox that grants your
wish to find a husband, a wife, love,
or whatever else you might be seeking—a
home, a kitten, I don’t know, really.
But you understand, at times we
instrumentalise God, placing our own
needs before Him, in such moments.
I notice this among young people today;
some even reach the level of frustration.
Well, I’m thirty; I have nobody; I
don’t feel like trying anymore, at all.
She says she no longer believes
that true love exists in this life.
She is deeply disappointed
in this way, I guess.
And you see, we come to a
lasting blindness that arises
from our own stubborn needs.
We do not seek God, but we ask
God to fulfil this need for us.
And so we come to despair, but if we
are aware of God's love and of our own
identity that I am worth something,
and if I am alone in this life today.
God, if you’ve given me someone
special, someone unlike anyone else
I’ve ever met, that’s wonderful indeed.
And what’s happening?
Many people rush things.
But when you’re aware you are loved by
God, you can wait for a relationship.
You’re not in that much of a hurry.
Of course it’s nice that everyone
should marry and settle down on time.
But you cannot fall into crisis
and frustration just because you’re
thirty now, haven’t found anyone, and
you’re tempted to rush into something.
So take your time, trust in God’s plan,
and let patience light your path forward.
There is nothing you can
do at this present moment.
So, really, are you in any
possible way worthy of life?
Yes, you are, indeed.
Do you truly have any real sense of
identity if you are merely a dream?
You indeed have.
We simply imagined ourselves
clearly in our own minds; if I stay
a dream, I am the most wretched.
Of course, the Bible says it is not
good for a person to be merely a dream.
But what I want to say is that,
when you are truly ready for
a relationship, you can wait.
Those who can't wait, who rush ahead,
would do well to look at those who have
had longer relationships in life today.
As soon as it ends, you can’t
even be single for a whole week.
Immediately into another
serious relationship, oh—somehow
something starts there.
Take note.
But is it luck, or is it merely flight?
You all know well when you have a more
serious, truly deep love and relationship,
yet we are truly emotional beings.
To emotionally recover, you need
at least a full year, not a week.
And I have never understood, how anyone
can be in a relationship for years,
and within a week or two enter another.
That means you find yourself emotionally
unhealed, and not yet wholly recovered.
And you would do well to distance
yourself from emotionally unhealed people.
For they can give you nothing but
pain and bitter resentment, not love.
And that is precisely why I tell
you there is no cause for hurry.
When you are truly aware of your own
identity and of God's love, you can
make careful choices without fear.
There is no despair.
Secondly, you, the people around
you, are half-paralysed by fear.
When you are aware of your identity and of
God's love, you can choose without fear.
What's with all this fear you
seem to have about getting
to know one another nowadays?
And here I could really say plenty
of things about it, for us all.
I strongly encourage you to meet
one another, but don't overdo it.
Recently a friend of mine and I were
talking, and I said that this will
end up in a sermon, because I felt
moved to say it, and perhaps many
of you do the same among yourselves.
While talking with one friend
the other day, I told him this
would end up as a sermon, and
the topic was going out on dates.
But it all started to accumulate,
mate, three or perhaps as many as
four dates within a single week.
And then I say, all right Sokole,
today you’ll be with one, tomorrow
with another, the third day with
the third, and by Friday you won’t
know which one you’ll be with.
And that, in my view,
is completely natural.
Why is that?
So with this one, you liked the hairstyle.
She is rich, she is clever, she
is serious, she is sometimes.
You're confused again, you still
don't know who she'd go for.
With that one you like something
about her, but it's not quite right.
And now, if all that could
be brought together into one,
that would be the perfect one.
And what are you doing?
You're confusing yourselves.
Then, why is it that?
Well, you devote yourself
to one single person.
If you happen not to like it, then you
neatly and cleanly clear things up,
and you set out to meet another person.
And no, many people like to be
noticed, which is what I have
been talking about all this time,
that something is happening.
But that is not enough; it
is not a solid foundation.
You know this well, and then you
cannot do it this way; I mean,
you shouldn’t be doing this.
And at this point there is no need for
you to be afraid if you are truly relaxed.
What still paralyses so many people
is... the fear that, within any kind
of relationship, in any form of bond,
they might very well lose themselves.
To me, that is the most catastrophic
and devastating thing there is.
How can you lose yourself if
you know yourself so well?
So, only if you are insecure, we men
may, indeed, say this to one another,
and even to their faces openly
refer to them as henpecked husbands.
You know the man who isn’t secure
in himself; as soon as he finds some
girl who’s a little sharper with her
hands, he can’t recognise him, mate.
He no longer drinks, he no longer
goes out, nothing—saint of the
night—and yet he doesn’t realise
that he has already lost himself.
Do you understand?
And many fear entering any relationship
for fear of losing themselves.
And that’s understandable too.
You don't need to be in any relationship
at all, not in friendship, nor in
love, where you end up losing yourself.
Why?
Why would you have to lose yourself?
Is there anyone who loves you as you are,
or would they drop you for being yourself?
So don't lose yourself, people.
Why?
It's hard work; we're not
chameleons, or that animal.
You can pretend for a month, or two in
a year, days spent in a relationship,
but when you surface again—the real
you, the person you really are—then
you'd better show all your worst sides
at once, so that if someone accepts
you, they accept you as you are.
Trying to hide your real self
behind a mask will only wear you
down over time, and it hurts.
Anyway, it will take him a
year or two to figure you out.
Well, now.
That particular sentence, the one with
which everyone here ought to move away
from this place, and which carries the
sense of the whole matter, is this: that
I am worthy and beloved by God, regardless
of whether I am alone, or whether I
have anyone with me, or anything at all.
Yet there always seems to be, somewhere
behind this sentence, the question of
whether anyone loves me and whether I
am worthy of love; I must admit that
there lie some wounds hidden away.
That is not the kind of sentence
you utter when someone says you
in such a way for no good reason.
Perhaps these are not large, bleeding
wounds that are visible to all, but
perhaps they are moments when we were not
noticed, or when we were not praised, or
when we were not drenched in some care,
love, or empathy that may have wounded us.
I say those are not the most common
wounds, the greatest ones that have
killed us and are bleeding now.
But all those small, very negligible
things—moments of rejection and
of being overlooked, insecurities
and fears—have shaped our hearts.
And that lurks somewhere deep inside us.
What image of ourselves do we have?
Sadly we often say and hear this,
when wounds inside us speak, we hear
the line that no one will want me.
If someone gets to know
me, they will leave me.
It is better to have a bad
relationship than to be alone.
There are also such
compromises, unfortunately.
But there you must come to Jesus.
Love is often a vulnerable area.
And there is no one who has not
been hurt there at some time.
I don't know whether that heals
or not, but the worst thing is
that what happened to you in one
relationship you carry into another.
Consequently, it is vitally important to
heal and become completely whole again.
When Jesus heals us, he does not speak as
we do when friends console one another.
Come on, you can do it; be strong,
be brave, endure this; aim for
something better than this.
What good is it to you?
Come on, have one; this will pass.
Jesus did not comfort people in that way.
Jesus was the first to endure rejection.
Jesus was the first to be betrayed.
When Jesus hung on the cross, he
did not say, 'My God, why does
this hurt me, why must I suffer?'
When the pain of love comes upon
us suddenly and overwhelmingly,
we are left shaken to the very
core, unable to speak or move.
Why did this happen to me?
What should I do now?
However, Jesus does not comfort us
in the ways we commonly comfort one
another; Jesus enters into our pain,
names it, and touches it deeply.
And you lead us into truth.
And that is the most important thing,
for this is the process by which
you will gradually work through it.
And what is truth?
Truth is not merely a thing you
can see or hold, but a living
reality that forms our lives.
There has never been anyone who wanted me.
Indeed, this is simply the case.
Some people simply did not
know how to truly love.
Observe still how these two sentences
sound very distinctly different indeed.
And even when someone hurt you
very deeply, they did not know
how to value your precious love.
Don't say such words, don't act in that
way, never claim that no one wanted me
or that I was left behind, but instead
simply say, in a calm voice, that some
people didn't know how to love me.
This is a very real and noticeable
difference, and, in fact, this
is the very truth we should hold.
Other people, at times, try to persuade
us that we are foolish, that we are
worthless, that we do not know how
to value or properly appreciate love.
But that is not the truth at all.
The vast majority of people accept love
because they need it in their lives.
However there are difficult
circumstances in life where
love does not come to fruition.
And please do not blame yourself;
rather, simply acknowledge that there
are people who never knew how to love me.
And please do not say that,
no one ever wanted me.
Therefore I earnestly urge you
to heed what Jesus heard now.
So that you often, in the quiet of your
heart, repeat it to yourself faithfully.
And my true identity comes from God,
and God loves me exactly as I am.
I am grateful to God that I am
blessed to have someone; if I
currently have no one, He will send
me someone; I am in God's hands today.
Do not press Jesus, and do not crush
Him, even in today's Gospel reading.
Why?
Because Jesus must be listened to,
and heeded with care today and always.
Jesus isn't here for us, to fulfil
those desires that blind you and
me today throughout our lives.
I have said that many times, and I
stand by it always, truly indeed.
It's good that God doesn't grant
all our desires, for not all of them
are good in truth, at all times.
We may be convinced at a given moment, but
not all people are right for us either.
I believe you have thought this through
many times, and perhaps even about
the very first love you had in life,
this and that, that and that one.
And I mean it truly, with that
said, I shall carry that thought
with me to the end of my life now.
Well, not much at all.
This happens quite often in life, but
you should not let yourself become
discouraged, because until you feel
secure and strong in yourself, you will
not find peace within a relationship.
And that is why this sort of thing
tends to persist when two people
are involved, especially if at
least one of them is immature, and
even more so if both are immature.
Then it turns into a kind
of general chaos indeed.
It somehow keeps getting pushed
along, yet it remains always
tense, and full of pressure.
Just take a moment to really think
about those of you who are in
relationships or who are married.
Are you relaxed and feeling
comfortable in yourselves tonight?
Are you without fear at all?
That is love, truly pure and simple.
You know, these girls in the choir
each have violins, one for each.
I don't know very much about music,
but this is how I personally see it.
So, sometimes our relationships are
like delicate musical instruments.
You have to hit the exact level of
intensity, with just the right emphasis.
If something is too quiet, you
still simply can't hear it.
Yet I steadfastly believe that those
fragile strings, if you over-tighten the
tiny, delicate tuning peg up there on the
headstock or even put excessive strain
on the guitar itself, they will snap.
A middle ground must be found.
Our relationships—family, marriages,
partnerships, and friendships—have, at
times, become increasingly overstrained.
Just one word is enough
and the strings snap.
Amen.